readme.md, before:

# Country Flags service using Spring Boot and Prometheus for metrics

Simple app for fetching flags for countries and exporting metrics to [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) using Spring Boot.


Metrics configuration is contained with the [MonitoringConfig](https://github.com/annaarun123/spring-boot-country-flags/blob/master/src/main/java/com/annaarun/countryflags/MonitoringConfig.java) class:

## Prerequisites

Install `Java 8`

Install and setup `maven`

Make sure `curl` is available or use a rest api tool such as `postman`

Continents, countries and flags are fetched from the JSON at 
[continents.json](https://github.com/annaarun123/spring-boot-country-flags/blob/master/src/main/resources/continents.json)

### Optional:

`Prometheus` setup is optional if you want to expand and productionalize this app.

## SQL DB Schema (using postgres)
Refer to `scripts/db/psql/create_db_tables`

## Build
```
mvn clean package
```

## Run
```
mvn spring-boot:run
```

## Test
```
mvn test
```
## Usage
```
curl -X GET http://localhost:8080/countries/flags
```

```
curl -X GET http://localhost:8080/countries/flags?continent=America
```

```
curl -X GET http://localhost:8080/countries/flags?country=Nigeria
```

## Metrics URL
```
curl localhost:8080/metrics
```

There are 3 functional metrics added 

### Counter for requests that try to get all countries
`country_flags_all_countries_requests_total`

### Counter for requests that try to filter by continent. 
`country_flags_by_continent_requests_total`
Continent name is added as a label and can be used to query using [promql](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/querying/basics/) 


### Counter for requests that try to filter by country.
`country_flags_by_country_requests_total`
Country name is added as a label and can be used to query using [promql](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/querying/basics/) 



## Example output
```
# HELP country_flags_all_countries_requests_total All Countries Total requests.
# TYPE country_flags_all_countries_requests_total counter
country_flags_all_countries_requests_total 3.0
# HELP country_flags_by_continent_requests_total By Continent Total requests.
# TYPE country_flags_by_continent_requests_total counter
country_flags_by_continent_requests_total{continent="America",} 1.0
country_flags_by_continent_requests_total{continent="Africa",} 2.0
# HELP country_flags_by_country_requests_total By Country Total requests.
# TYPE country_flags_by_country_requests_total counter
country_flags_by_country_requests_total{country="India",} 1.0
country_flags_by_country_requests_total{country="Brazil",} 1.0


# HELP jvm_memory_bytes_used Used bytes of a given JVM memory area.
# TYPE jvm_memory_bytes_used gauge
jvm_memory_bytes_used{area="heap",} 1.47710352E8
jvm_memory_bytes_used{area="nonheap",} 5.1258008E7
# HELP jvm_memory_bytes_committed Committed (bytes) of a given JVM memory area.
# TYPE jvm_memory_bytes_committed gauge
jvm_memory_bytes_committed{area="heap",} 3.28204288E8
jvm_memory_bytes_committed{area="nonheap",} 5.2166656E7
# HELP jvm_memory_bytes_max Maximum (bytes) of a given JVM memory area.
# TYPE jvm_memory_bytes_max gauge
jvm_memory_bytes_max{area="heap",} 3.71720192E9
jvm_memory_bytes_max{area="nonheap",} -1.0
# HELP jvm_memory_pool_bytes_used Used bytes of a given JVM memory pool.
# TYPE jvm_memory_pool_bytes_used gauge
jvm_memory_pool_bytes_used{pool="Code Cache",} 1.456608E7
jvm_memory_pool_bytes_used{pool="Metaspace",} 3.2659288E7
jvm_memory_pool_bytes_used{pool="Compressed Class Space",} 4041560.0
jvm_memory_pool_bytes_used{pool="PS Eden Space",} 1.2226136E8
jvm_memory_pool_bytes_used{pool="PS Survivor Space",} 1.0473704E7
jvm_memory_pool_bytes_used{pool="PS Old Gen",} 1.4975288E7
# HELP jvm_memory_pool_bytes_committed Limit (bytes) of a given JVM memory pool.
# TYPE jvm_memory_pool_bytes_committed gauge
jvm_memory_pool_bytes_committed{pool="Code Cache",} 1.4680064E7
jvm_memory_pool_bytes_committed{pool="Metaspace",} 3.3292288E7
jvm_memory_pool_bytes_committed{pool="Compressed Class Space",} 4194304.0
jvm_memory_pool_bytes_committed{pool="PS Eden Space",} 2.08142336E8
jvm_memory_pool_bytes_committed{pool="PS Survivor Space",} 1.048576E7
jvm_memory_pool_bytes_committed{pool="PS Old Gen",} 1.09576192E8
# HELP jvm_memory_pool_bytes_max Max (bytes) of a given JVM memory pool.
# TYPE jvm_memory_pool_bytes_max gauge
jvm_memory_pool_bytes_max{pool="Code Cache",} 2.5165824E8
jvm_memory_pool_bytes_max{pool="Metaspace",} -1.0
jvm_memory_pool_bytes_max{pool="Compressed Class Space",} 1.073741824E9
jvm_memory_pool_bytes_max{pool="PS Eden Space",} 1.372585984E9
jvm_memory_pool_bytes_max{pool="PS Survivor Space",} 1.048576E7
jvm_memory_pool_bytes_max{pool="PS Old Gen",} 2.788163584E9
# HELP httpsessions_max httpsessions_max
# TYPE httpsessions_max gauge
httpsessions_max -1.0
# HELP httpsessions_active httpsessions_active
# TYPE httpsessions_active gauge
httpsessions_active 0.0
# HELP mem mem
# TYPE mem gauge
mem 370583.0
# HELP mem_free mem_free
# TYPE mem_free gauge
mem_free 176263.0
# HELP processors processors
# TYPE processors gauge
processors 8.0
# HELP instance_uptime instance_uptime
# TYPE instance_uptime gauge
instance_uptime 9113.0
# HELP uptime uptime
# TYPE uptime gauge
uptime 11884.0
# HELP systemload_average systemload_average
# TYPE systemload_average gauge
systemload_average 1.47
# HELP heap_committed heap_committed
# TYPE heap_committed gauge
heap_committed 320512.0
# HELP heap_init heap_init
# TYPE heap_init gauge
heap_init 256000.0
# HELP heap_used heap_used
# TYPE heap_used gauge
heap_used 144248.0
# HELP heap heap
# TYPE heap gauge
heap 3630080.0
# HELP nonheap_committed nonheap_committed
# TYPE nonheap_committed gauge
nonheap_committed 50944.0
# HELP nonheap_init nonheap_init
# TYPE nonheap_init gauge
nonheap_init 2496.0
# HELP nonheap_used nonheap_used
# TYPE nonheap_used gauge
nonheap_used 50072.0
# HELP nonheap nonheap
# TYPE nonheap gauge
nonheap 0.0
# HELP threads_peak threads_peak
# TYPE threads_peak gauge
threads_peak 17.0
# HELP threads_daemon threads_daemon
# TYPE threads_daemon gauge
threads_daemon 14.0
# HELP threads_totalStarted threads_totalStarted
# TYPE threads_totalStarted gauge
threads_totalStarted 21.0
# HELP threads threads
# TYPE threads gauge
threads 16.0
# HELP classes classes
# TYPE classes gauge
classes 5964.0
# HELP classes_loaded classes_loaded
# TYPE classes_loaded gauge
classes_loaded 5964.0
# HELP classes_unloaded classes_unloaded
# TYPE classes_unloaded gauge
classes_unloaded 0.0
# HELP gc_ps_scavenge_count gc_ps_scavenge_count
# TYPE gc_ps_scavenge_count gauge
gc_ps_scavenge_count 4.0
# HELP gc_ps_scavenge_time gc_ps_scavenge_time
# TYPE gc_ps_scavenge_time gauge
gc_ps_scavenge_time 77.0
# HELP gc_ps_marksweep_count gc_ps_marksweep_count
# TYPE gc_ps_marksweep_count gauge
gc_ps_marksweep_count 1.0
# HELP gc_ps_marksweep_time gc_ps_marksweep_time
# TYPE gc_ps_marksweep_time gauge
gc_ps_marksweep_time 38.0
# HELP jvm_gc_collection_seconds Time spent in a given JVM garbage collector in seconds.
# TYPE jvm_gc_collection_seconds summary
jvm_gc_collection_seconds_sum{gc="PS Scavenge",} 0.077
jvm_gc_collection_seconds_count{gc="PS Scavenge",} 4.0
jvm_gc_collection_seconds_sum{gc="PS MarkSweep",} 0.038
jvm_gc_collection_seconds_count{gc="PS MarkSweep",} 1.0
# HELP jvm_threads_current Current thread count of a JVM
# TYPE jvm_threads_current gauge
jvm_threads_current 16.0
# HELP jvm_threads_daemon Daemon thread count of a JVM
# TYPE jvm_threads_daemon gauge
jvm_threads_daemon 14.0
# HELP jvm_peak_threads Peak thread count of a JVM
# TYPE jvm_peak_threads gauge
jvm_threads_peak 17.0
# HELP jvm_threads_started_total Started thread count of a JVM
# TYPE jvm_threads_started_total counter
jvm_threads_started_total 21.0
# HELP process_cpu_seconds_total Total user and system CPU time spent in seconds.
# TYPE process_cpu_seconds_total counter
process_cpu_seconds_total 17.01
# HELP process_start_time_seconds Start time of the process since unix epoch in seconds.
# TYPE process_start_time_seconds gauge
process_start_time_seconds 1.476213245759E9
# HELP process_open_fds Number of open file descriptors.
# TYPE process_open_fds gauge
process_open_fds 66.0
# HELP process_max_fds Maximum number of open file descriptors.
# TYPE process_max_fds gauge
process_max_fds 65536.0
# HELP process_virtual_memory_bytes Virtual memory size in bytes.
# TYPE process_virtual_memory_bytes gauge
process_virtual_memory_bytes 7.97188096E9
# HELP process_resident_memory_bytes Resident memory size in bytes.
# TYPE process_resident_memory_bytes gauge
process_resident_memory_bytes 3.35212544E8
```

Commit message:

Updated readme to include screenshots of metrics

readme.md, after:

# Country Flags service using Spring Boot and Prometheus for metrics

Simple app for fetching flags for countries and exporting metrics to [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) using Spring Boot.


Metrics configuration is contained with the [MonitoringConfig](https://github.com/annaarun123/spring-boot-country-flags/blob/master/src/main/java/com/annaarun/countryflags/MonitoringConfig.java) class:

## Prerequisites

Install `Java 8`

Install and setup `maven`

Make sure `curl` is available or use a rest api tool such as `postman`

Continents, countries and flags are fetched from the JSON at 
[continents.json](https://github.com/annaarun123/spring-boot-country-flags/blob/master/src/main/resources/continents.json)

### Optional:

`Prometheus` setup is optional if you want to expand and productionalize this app.

## SQL DB Schema (using postgres)
Refer to `scripts/db/psql/create_db_tables`

## Build
```
mvn clean package
```

## Run
```
mvn spring-boot:run
```

## Test
```
mvn test
```
## Usage
```
curl -X GET http://localhost:8080/countries/flags
```

```
curl -X GET http://localhost:8080/countries/flags?continent=America
```

```
curl -X GET http://localhost:8080/countries/flags?country=Nigeria
```

## Metrics URL
```
curl localhost:8080/metrics
```

There are 3 functional metrics added 

### Counter for requests that try to get all countries
`country_flags_all_countries_requests_total`

### Counter for requests that try to filter by continent. 
`country_flags_by_continent_requests_total`
Continent name is added as a label and can be used to query using [promql](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/querying/basics/) 


### Counter for requests that try to filter by country.
`country_flags_by_country_requests_total`
Country name is added as a label and can be used to query using [promql](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/querying/basics/) 



## Example output

Here are some screenshots and also text output of `/metrics` endpoint

![Screenshot 1](metrics_screenshot1.png)
![Screenshot 2](metrics_screenshot2.png)

```
# HELP country_flags_all_countries_requests_total All Countries Total requests.
# TYPE country_flags_all_countries_requests_total counter
country_flags_all_countries_requests_total 3.0
# HELP country_flags_by_continent_requests_total By Continent Total requests.
# TYPE country_flags_by_continent_requests_total counter
country_flags_by_continent_requests_total{continent="America",} 1.0
country_flags_by_continent_requests_total{continent="Africa",} 2.0
# HELP country_flags_by_country_requests_total By Country Total requests.
# TYPE country_flags_by_country_requests_total counter
country_flags_by_country_requests_total{country="India",} 1.0
country_flags_by_country_requests_total{country="Brazil",} 1.0


# HELP jvm_memory_bytes_used Used bytes of a given JVM memory area.
# TYPE jvm_memory_bytes_used gauge
jvm_memory_bytes_used{area="heap",} 1.47710352E8
jvm_memory_bytes_used{area="nonheap",} 5.1258008E7
# HELP jvm_memory_bytes_committed Committed (bytes) of a given JVM memory area.
# TYPE jvm_memory_bytes_committed gauge
jvm_memory_bytes_committed{area="heap",} 3.28204288E8
jvm_memory_bytes_committed{area="nonheap",} 5.2166656E7
# HELP jvm_memory_bytes_max Maximum (bytes) of a given JVM memory area.
# TYPE jvm_memory_bytes_max gauge
jvm_memory_bytes_max{area="heap",} 3.71720192E9
jvm_memory_bytes_max{area="nonheap",} -1.0
# HELP jvm_memory_pool_bytes_used Used bytes of a given JVM memory pool.
# TYPE jvm_memory_pool_bytes_used gauge
jvm_memory_pool_bytes_used{pool="Code Cache",} 1.456608E7
jvm_memory_pool_bytes_used{pool="Metaspace",} 3.2659288E7
jvm_memory_pool_bytes_used{pool="Compressed Class Space",} 4041560.0
jvm_memory_pool_bytes_used{pool="PS Eden Space",} 1.2226136E8
jvm_memory_pool_bytes_used{pool="PS Survivor Space",} 1.0473704E7
jvm_memory_pool_bytes_used{pool="PS Old Gen",} 1.4975288E7
# HELP jvm_memory_pool_bytes_committed Limit (bytes) of a given JVM memory pool.
# TYPE jvm_memory_pool_bytes_committed gauge
jvm_memory_pool_bytes_committed{pool="Code Cache",} 1.4680064E7
jvm_memory_pool_bytes_committed{pool="Metaspace",} 3.3292288E7
jvm_memory_pool_bytes_committed{pool="Compressed Class Space",} 4194304.0
jvm_memory_pool_bytes_committed{pool="PS Eden Space",} 2.08142336E8
jvm_memory_pool_bytes_committed{pool="PS Survivor Space",} 1.048576E7
jvm_memory_pool_bytes_committed{pool="PS Old Gen",} 1.09576192E8
# HELP jvm_memory_pool_bytes_max Max (bytes) of a given JVM memory pool.
# TYPE jvm_memory_pool_bytes_max gauge
jvm_memory_pool_bytes_max{pool="Code Cache",} 2.5165824E8
jvm_memory_pool_bytes_max{pool="Metaspace",} -1.0
jvm_memory_pool_bytes_max{pool="Compressed Class Space",} 1.073741824E9
jvm_memory_pool_bytes_max{pool="PS Eden Space",} 1.372585984E9
jvm_memory_pool_bytes_max{pool="PS Survivor Space",} 1.048576E7
jvm_memory_pool_bytes_max{pool="PS Old Gen",} 2.788163584E9
# HELP httpsessions_max httpsessions_max
# TYPE httpsessions_max gauge
httpsessions_max -1.0
# HELP httpsessions_active httpsessions_active
# TYPE httpsessions_active gauge
httpsessions_active 0.0
# HELP mem mem
# TYPE mem gauge
mem 370583.0
# HELP mem_free mem_free
# TYPE mem_free gauge
mem_free 176263.0
# HELP processors processors
# TYPE processors gauge
processors 8.0
# HELP instance_uptime instance_uptime
# TYPE instance_uptime gauge
instance_uptime 9113.0
# HELP uptime uptime
# TYPE uptime gauge
uptime 11884.0
# HELP systemload_average systemload_average
# TYPE systemload_average gauge
systemload_average 1.47
# HELP heap_committed heap_committed
# TYPE heap_committed gauge
heap_committed 320512.0
# HELP heap_init heap_init
# TYPE heap_init gauge
heap_init 256000.0
# HELP heap_used heap_used
# TYPE heap_used gauge
heap_used 144248.0
# HELP heap heap
# TYPE heap gauge
heap 3630080.0
# HELP nonheap_committed nonheap_committed
# TYPE nonheap_committed gauge
nonheap_committed 50944.0
# HELP nonheap_init nonheap_init
# TYPE nonheap_init gauge
nonheap_init 2496.0
# HELP nonheap_used nonheap_used
# TYPE nonheap_used gauge
nonheap_used 50072.0
# HELP nonheap nonheap
# TYPE nonheap gauge
nonheap 0.0
# HELP threads_peak threads_peak
# TYPE threads_peak gauge
threads_peak 17.0
# HELP threads_daemon threads_daemon
# TYPE threads_daemon gauge
threads_daemon 14.0
# HELP threads_totalStarted threads_totalStarted
# TYPE threads_totalStarted gauge
threads_totalStarted 21.0
# HELP threads threads
# TYPE threads gauge
threads 16.0
# HELP classes classes
# TYPE classes gauge
classes 5964.0
# HELP classes_loaded classes_loaded
# TYPE classes_loaded gauge
classes_loaded 5964.0
# HELP classes_unloaded classes_unloaded
# TYPE classes_unloaded gauge
classes_unloaded 0.0
# HELP gc_ps_scavenge_count gc_ps_scavenge_count
# TYPE gc_ps_scavenge_count gauge
gc_ps_scavenge_count 4.0
# HELP gc_ps_scavenge_time gc_ps_scavenge_time
# TYPE gc_ps_scavenge_time gauge
gc_ps_scavenge_time 77.0
# HELP gc_ps_marksweep_count gc_ps_marksweep_count
# TYPE gc_ps_marksweep_count gauge
gc_ps_marksweep_count 1.0
# HELP gc_ps_marksweep_time gc_ps_marksweep_time
# TYPE gc_ps_marksweep_time gauge
gc_ps_marksweep_time 38.0
# HELP jvm_gc_collection_seconds Time spent in a given JVM garbage collector in seconds.
# TYPE jvm_gc_collection_seconds summary
jvm_gc_collection_seconds_sum{gc="PS Scavenge",} 0.077
jvm_gc_collection_seconds_count{gc="PS Scavenge",} 4.0
jvm_gc_collection_seconds_sum{gc="PS MarkSweep",} 0.038
jvm_gc_collection_seconds_count{gc="PS MarkSweep",} 1.0
# HELP jvm_threads_current Current thread count of a JVM
# TYPE jvm_threads_current gauge
jvm_threads_current 16.0
# HELP jvm_threads_daemon Daemon thread count of a JVM
# TYPE jvm_threads_daemon gauge
jvm_threads_daemon 14.0
# HELP jvm_peak_threads Peak thread count of a JVM
# TYPE jvm_peak_threads gauge
jvm_threads_peak 17.0
# HELP jvm_threads_started_total Started thread count of a JVM
# TYPE jvm_threads_started_total counter
jvm_threads_started_total 21.0
# HELP process_cpu_seconds_total Total user and system CPU time spent in seconds.
# TYPE process_cpu_seconds_total counter
process_cpu_seconds_total 17.01
# HELP process_start_time_seconds Start time of the process since unix epoch in seconds.
# TYPE process_start_time_seconds gauge
process_start_time_seconds 1.476213245759E9
# HELP process_open_fds Number of open file descriptors.
# TYPE process_open_fds gauge
process_open_fds 66.0
# HELP process_max_fds Maximum number of open file descriptors.
# TYPE process_max_fds gauge
process_max_fds 65536.0
# HELP process_virtual_memory_bytes Virtual memory size in bytes.
# TYPE process_virtual_memory_bytes gauge
process_virtual_memory_bytes 7.97188096E9
# HELP process_resident_memory_bytes Resident memory size in bytes.
# TYPE process_resident_memory_bytes gauge
process_resident_memory_bytes 3.35212544E8
```
